References
----------

About MISRA-C
*************

The official website of the MISRA association https://www.misra.org.uk/ has
many freely available resources about MISRA-C, some of which can be downloaded
after registering on the MISRA Bulletin Board at
https://www.misra.org.uk/forum/ (like the set of examples from MISRA-C:2012
document which includes the one-line description of all guidelines).

The following documents are available freely:

- `MISRA Compliance 2016: Achieving compliance with MISRA coding guidelines`,
  2016, which explains the rationale and process for compliance, including a
  thorough discussions of acceptable deviations

- `MISRA C:2012 - Amendment 1: Additional security guidelines for MISRA
  C:2012`, 2016, which contains 14 additional guidelines focusing on
  security. This is a minor addition to MISRA-C, that we did not feel we needed
  to discuss further in this book.

The main MISRA-C:2012 document is available at a small cost from the MISRA
webstore.

PRQA is the company at the origin of the first version of MISRA-C, and they
have been very involved in every version since then. Their webpage
http://www.prqa.com/coding-standards/misra/ contains many resources about
MISRA-C: product datasheets, white papers, webinars, trainings.

PRQA Resources Library at
http://info.prqa.com/resources-library?filter=white_paper has interesting feely
available white papers on MISRA-C and the use of static analyzers:

- an introduction to MISRA-C:2012 at
  http://info.prqa.com/misra-c-2012-whitepaper-evaluation-lp

- `The Myth of Perfect MISRA Compliance` at
  http://info.prqa.com/myth-of-perfect-misra-compliance-evaluation-lp,
  providing background information on the use and limitations of static
  analyzers for checking MISRA-C compliance

ISO standardized in 2013 a set of 45 rules focused on security, available in
the `C Secure Coding Rules` document. A draft is freely available at
http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n1624.pdf

MISRA association published in 2018 a document `MISRA C:2012 - Addendum 2:
Coverage of MISRA C:2012 against ISO/IEC TS 17961:2013 "C Secure"` mapping ISO
rules to MISRA-C:2012 guidelines, available freely from
https://www.misra.org.uk/

About SPARK
***********

The e-learning website https://learn.adacore.com/ contains a freely available
interactive course on SPARK.

The SPARK User's Guide is available at
http://docs.adacore.com/spark2014-docs/html/ug/

The SPARK Reference Manual is available at
http://docs.adacore.com/spark2014-docs/html/lrm/

A student-oriented textbook on SPARK is `Building High Integrity Applications
with SPARK` by McCormick and Chapin, published by Cambridge University
Press. It is sold online by Amazon and many others.

For a historical account of the evolution of SPARK technology and its use in
industry, see the article `Are We There Yet? 20 Years of Industrial Theorem
Proving with SPARK` by Chapman and Schanda, at
http://proteancode.com/keynote.pdf

The website https://www.adacore.com/sparkpro is a portal for up-to-date
information and resources on SPARK. AdaCore blog at https://blog.adacore.com/
frequently hosts posts on the latest evolutions of SPARK.

The document `AdaCore Technologies for Cyber Security` presents the usage of
AdaCore's technology to prevent or mitigate the most common security
vulnerabilities in software. See:
https://www.adacore.com/books/adacore-tech-for-cyber-security

The document `AdaCore Technologies for CENELEC EN 50128:2011` presents the
usage of AdaCore's technology in conjunction with the CENELEC EN 50128:2011
standard. It describes in particular where the SPARK technology fits best and
how it can best be used to meet various requirements of the standard. See:
https://www.adacore.com/books/cenelec-en-50128-2011

The document `AdaCore Technologies for DO-178C/ED-12C` similarly presents the
usage of AdaCore's technology in conjunction with the DO-178C/ED-12C standard,
and describes in particular the use of SPARK in relation with the Formal
Methods supplement DO-333/ED-216. See:
https://www.adacore.com/books/do-178c-tech

About MISRA-C and SPARK
***********************

The blog post at
https://blog.adacore.com/misra-c-2012-vs-spark-2014-the-subset-matching-game
reviews the 27 undecidable rules in MISRA-C:2012 and describes how SPARK
addresses them.

The white paper `A Comparison of SPARK with MISRA C and Frama-C` at
https://www.adacore.com/papers/compare-spark-misra-c-frama-c compares SPARK to
MISRA-C and to the formal verification tool Frama-C for C programs.
